<!--
slug: wherecampdc-report
date: Fri Jun 17 2011 14:36:29 GMT+0100 (BST)
tags: 
title: #wherecampDC report
id: 6620381566
link: http://blog.vizzuality.com/post/6620381566/wherecampdc-report
raw: {"blog_name":"vizzuality","id":6620381566,"post_url":"http://blog.vizzuality.com/post/6620381566/wherecampdc-report","slug":"wherecampdc-report","type":"text","date":"2011-06-17 13:36:29 GMT","timestamp":1308317789,"state":"published","format":"html","reblog_key":"gZiDAWDN","tags":[],"short_url":"http://tmblr.co/ZQVgQy6Acm5_","highlighted":[],"note_count":0,"title":"#wherecampDC report","body":"<p>Last week <a href=\"http://twitter.com/#!/jatorre\">@jatorre</a> had the opportunity to attend <a href=\"http://www.wherecampdc.org/\">#wherecampdc </a>in Washington DC. The event was a blast, lot of fun and interesting discussions. Here is a little report on what he found. In his own words&hellip;</p>\n<p>First of all It has been so far the best geo event I have ever been. The level of the discussions and the wiling of people to share was great. </p>\n<p>On Friday night there were the <a href=\"http://www.wherecampdc.org/2011/04/friday-ignite-spatial/\">ignite talks </a>when there were some good presentations. There was a presentation on pixel bender by a company called <a href=\"http://www.blueraster.com/\">Blueraster</a>, pretty much doing the same things we have <a href=\"http://mountainbiodiversity.org/\">done</a> <a href=\"http://smoothraster.appspot.com/\">with</a> <a href=\"http://biodivertido.blogspot.com/2009/12/recreating-european-starling-story.html\">it</a>. They do it based on the <a href=\"http://help.arcgis.com/en/webapi/flex/index.html\">ESRI Flex API</a>. There was one about Tilemill, nothing you dont know already, another about geocommons, opening their analysis capabilities we tried last Feb. Some others from National Geogrpahic, ESRI&hellip; well a bit of everything. I talked finally about OldWeather. And I think people liked it. Heare are the slides.</p>\n<p><iframe src=\"http://www.slideshare.net/slideshow/embed_code/8295807\" width=\"425\" height=\"355\" frameborder=\"0\" marginwidth=\"0\" marginheight=\"0\" scrolling=\"no\"></iframe></p>\n\n<p>Now the second day, it was the actual unconference. Never been before in an unconference and is a neat idea, people sef organize in topics for discussions at the beginning. I attended a talk on mobile data capturing tools and heard that basically everything still sucks and that is hard to get developing countries embrace technologies because of cost and things alike. A company called <a href=\"http://spatialnetworks.com/\">Spatial Networks </a>talked about some complete solutions for data capturing, free for non commercial use but not Open Source. Other really cool and inspiring project I learnt about was  <a href=\"http://walking-papers.org/\">Walking Papers</a>, that now I learn that <a href=\"http://aaronland.info/\">Aaron</a> is involved. Aaron is a continuos surprise!</p>\n<p>Then I attended a lunch session about deforestation. How much satellite data is becoming obiquos, landsat has been publicly released and lot of services are starting to appear offering the data for free. That will enable tools like we are building for Google.org. People seem to be interested on collaborating with us on the deforestation tool as an open source project, so thats nice, we will see where it all gets, but a bonus motivation to do a great work for <a href=\"http://www.imazon.org.br/\">imazon</a>.</p>\n<p>After that I went to a session about <a href=\"http://mapnik.org/\">Mapnik</a> with <a href=\"http://twitter.com/#!/springmeyer\">Dane Springmeyer</a> hosting it. Pretty amazing what these guys are thinking. There was a lot of interesting discussion about how to enable different kinds of interactivity using <a href=\"https://github.com/mapbox/mbtiles-spec/blob/master/1.1/utfgrid.md\">UTF8Grids</a> and things like that. Also Dane is thinking hard how to improve performance in multiple fronts in mapnik so there is a lot of innovation going in this front. We discussed multiple ways to enable interactivity, vector vs tile, flash vs canvas&hellip; great discussion.</p>\n<p>After that went into a session with the <a href=\"http://twitter.com/#!/davetroy\">Dave Troy</a>, the creator of <a href=\"http://twittervision.com/\">TwitterVision</a>, do you remember? This application that started visualizing tweets on a map. He showed some really curious graphs on the amount of geolocated tweets, the locations, devices, etc. There were some curious things, like there is more absolute geolocated tweets in South America than in North America, the incredible importance of Indonesia where tweeting is a really big thing. He also talked about how to capture the stream of tweets, process them, etc.</p>\n<p>Later there was a session I organized about deforestation and Landsat imagery&hellip; I showed them and explained them what we are trying to do with <a href=\"http://www.visualraster.com/\">visualraster</a>. ESRI and BlueRaster have done the same already with Flex and Pixel Bender. We talked a bit if it would be possible to use Canvas or WebGL to perform similar things, but although I wanted to make it a technical discussion, it really did not happen.</p>\n<p>After than we went for beers, and had quite a lot of them! Talked with lot of people interesting stuff that I will be little by little assimilate and disseminate :) The guys from <a href=\"http://www.developmentseed.org/\">developmentseed</a> are awesome, we really share lot of things with them.</p>\n<p>There were lot of people interested on environment and conservation so we decided to organize this fall a #ecotechcamp in NY with at least  <a href=\"http://twitter.com/#!/nicopresto\">@nicopresto</a> and <a href=\"http://twitter.com/#!/robinkraft\">@robinkraft</a>. I am finding lot of interesting people outside the Biodiversity Informatics and Conservation world with lot of new ideas about how to use geo.</p>\n<p>Finally I want to thank all organizers and <a href=\"http://wherecampdc.org/2010/10/wherecampdc-sponsorships/\">sponsor</a> of the event, specially <a href=\"http://twitter.com/#!/kelsosCorner\">Nathaniel</a>, for their great job organizing everything. Seriously you guys rock.</p>\n<p>Now, when should we organize a #wherecampNY ??</p>","reblog":{"tree_html":"","comment":"<p>Last week <a href=\"http://twitter.com/#!/jatorre\">@jatorre</a> had the opportunity to attend <a href=\"http://www.wherecampdc.org/\">#wherecampdc </a>in&nbsp;Washington&nbsp;DC. The event was a blast, lot of fun and interesting discussions. Here is a little report on what he found. In his own words&hellip;</p>\n<p>First of all&nbsp;It has been so far the best geo event I have ever been. The level of the discussions and the wiling of people to share was great.&nbsp;</p>\n<p>On Friday night there were the <a href=\"http://www.wherecampdc.org/2011/04/friday-ignite-spatial/\">ignite talks </a>when there were some good presentations. There was a presentation on pixel bender by a company called <a href=\"http://www.blueraster.com/\">Blueraster</a>, pretty much doing the same things we have <a href=\"http://mountainbiodiversity.org/\">done</a> <a href=\"http://smoothraster.appspot.com/\">with</a> <a href=\"http://biodivertido.blogspot.com/2009/12/recreating-european-starling-story.html\">it</a>. They do it based on the <a href=\"http://help.arcgis.com/en/webapi/flex/index.html\">ESRI Flex API</a>. There was one about Tilemill, nothing you dont know already, another about geocommons, opening their analysis capabilities we tried last Feb. Some others from National Geogrpahic, ESRI&hellip; well a bit of everything. I talked finally about OldWeather. And I think people liked it. Heare are the slides.</p>\n<p><iframe src=\"http://www.slideshare.net/slideshow/embed_code/8295807\" width=\"425\" height=\"355\" frameborder=\"0\" marginwidth=\"0\" marginheight=\"0\" scrolling=\"no\"></iframe></p>\n\n<p>Now the second day, it was the actual unconference. Never been before in an unconference and is a neat idea, people sef organize in topics for discussions at the beginning. I attended a talk on mobile data capturing tools and heard that basically everything still sucks and that is hard to get developing countries embrace technologies because of cost and things alike. A company called <a href=\"http://spatialnetworks.com/\">Spatial Networks </a>talked about some complete solutions for data capturing, free for non commercial use but not Open Source. Other really cool and inspiring project I learnt about was &nbsp;<a href=\"http://walking-papers.org/\">Walking Papers</a>, that now I learn that <a href=\"http://aaronland.info/\">Aaron</a> is involved. Aaron is a continuos surprise!</p>\n<p>Then I attended a lunch session about deforestation. How much satellite data is becoming obiquos, landsat has been publicly released and lot of services are starting to appear offering the data for free. That will enable tools like we are building for Google.org. People seem to be interested on collaborating with us on the deforestation tool as an open source project, so thats nice, we will see where it all gets, but a bonus motivation to do a great work for <a href=\"http://www.imazon.org.br/\">imazon</a>.</p>\n<p>After that I went to a session about <a href=\"http://mapnik.org/\">Mapnik</a> with <a href=\"http://twitter.com/#!/springmeyer\">Dane Springmeyer</a> hosting it. Pretty amazing what these guys are thinking. There was a lot of interesting discussion about how to enable different kinds of interactivity using <a href=\"https://github.com/mapbox/mbtiles-spec/blob/master/1.1/utfgrid.md\">UTF8Grids</a> and things like that. Also Dane is thinking hard how to improve performance in multiple fronts in mapnik so there is a lot of innovation going in this front. We discussed multiple ways to enable interactivity, vector vs tile, flash vs canvas&hellip; great discussion.</p>\n<p>After that went into a session with the <a href=\"http://twitter.com/#!/davetroy\">Dave Troy</a>, the creator of <a href=\"http://twittervision.com/\">TwitterVision</a>, do you remember? This application that started visualizing tweets on a map. He showed some really curious graphs on the amount of geolocated tweets, the locations, devices, etc.&nbsp;There were some curious things, like there is more absolute geolocated tweets in South America than in North America, the incredible importance of&nbsp;Indonesia&nbsp;where tweeting is a really big thing. He also talked about how to capture the stream of tweets, process them, etc.</p>\n<p>Later there was a session I organized about deforestation and Landsat imagery&hellip; I showed them and explained them what we are trying to do with <a href=\"http://www.visualraster.com/\">visualraster</a>. ESRI and BlueRaster have done the same already with Flex and Pixel Bender. We talked a bit if it would be possible to use Canvas or WebGL to perform similar things, but although I wanted to make it a technical discussion, it really did not happen.</p>\n<p>After than we went for beers, and had quite a lot of them! Talked with lot of people interesting stuff that I will be little by little assimilate and disseminate :) The guys from <a href=\"http://www.developmentseed.org/\">developmentseed</a> are awesome, we really share lot of things with them.</p>\n<p>There were lot of people interested on environment and conservation so we decided to organize this fall a #ecotechcamp&nbsp;in NY with at least &nbsp;<a href=\"http://twitter.com/#!/nicopresto\">@nicopresto</a>&nbsp;and <a href=\"http://twitter.com/#!/robinkraft\">@robinkraft</a>. I am finding lot of interesting people outside the Biodiversity Informatics and Conservation world with lot of new ideas about how to use geo.</p>\n<p>Finally I want to thank all organizers and <a href=\"http://wherecampdc.org/2010/10/wherecampdc-sponsorships/\">sponsor</a> of the event, specially <a href=\"http://twitter.com/#!/kelsosCorner\">Nathaniel</a>, for their great job organizing everything. Seriously you guys rock.</p>\n<p>Now, when should we organize a #wherecampNY ??</p>"},"trail":[{"blog":{"name":"vizzuality","theme":{"avatar_shape":"square","background_color":"#FAFAFA","body_font":"Helvetica Neue","header_bounds":"","header_image":"http://assets.tumblr.com/images/default_header/optica_pattern_09.png?_v=abe6f565397f54e880c2b76e6fc2022e","header_image_focused":"http://assets.tumblr.com/images/default_header/optica_pattern_09_focused_v3.png?_v=abe6f565397f54e880c2b76e6fc2022e","header_image_scaled":"http://assets.tumblr.com/images/default_header/optica_pattern_09_focused_v3.png?_v=abe6f565397f54e880c2b76e6fc2022e","header_stretch":true,"link_color":"#529ECC","show_avatar":true,"show_description":true,"show_header_image":true,"show_title":true,"title_color":"#444444","title_font":"Gibson","title_font_weight":"bold"}},"post":{"id":"6620381566"},"content":"<p>Last week <a href=\"http://twitter.com/#!/jatorre\">@jatorre</a> had the opportunity to attend <a href=\"http://www.wherecampdc.org/\">#wherecampdc </a>in Washington DC. The event was a blast, lot of fun and interesting discussions. Here is a little report on what he found. In his own words…</p>\n<p>First of all It has been so far the best geo event I have ever been. The level of the discussions and the wiling of people to share was great. </p>\n<p>On Friday night there were the <a href=\"http://www.wherecampdc.org/2011/04/friday-ignite-spatial/\">ignite talks </a>when there were some good presentations. There was a presentation on pixel bender by a company called <a href=\"http://www.blueraster.com/\">Blueraster</a>, pretty much doing the same things we have <a href=\"http://mountainbiodiversity.org/\">done</a> <a href=\"http://smoothraster.appspot.com/\">with</a> <a href=\"http://biodivertido.blogspot.com/2009/12/recreating-european-starling-story.html\">it</a>. They do it based on the <a href=\"http://help.arcgis.com/en/webapi/flex/index.html\">ESRI Flex API</a>. There was one about Tilemill, nothing you dont know already, another about geocommons, opening their analysis capabilities we tried last Feb. Some others from National Geogrpahic, ESRI… well a bit of everything. I talked finally about OldWeather. And I think people liked it. Heare are the slides.</p>\n<p><iframe src=\"http://www.slideshare.net/slideshow/embed_code/8295807\" width=\"425\" height=\"355\" frameborder=\"0\" marginwidth=\"0\" marginheight=\"0\" scrolling=\"no\"></iframe></p>\n\n<p>Now the second day, it was the actual unconference. Never been before in an unconference and is a neat idea, people sef organize in topics for discussions at the beginning. I attended a talk on mobile data capturing tools and heard that basically everything still sucks and that is hard to get developing countries embrace technologies because of cost and things alike. A company called <a href=\"http://spatialnetworks.com/\">Spatial Networks </a>talked about some complete solutions for data capturing, free for non commercial use but not Open Source. Other really cool and inspiring project I learnt about was  <a href=\"http://walking-papers.org/\">Walking Papers</a>, that now I learn that <a href=\"http://aaronland.info/\">Aaron</a> is involved. Aaron is a continuos surprise!</p>\n<p>Then I attended a lunch session about deforestation. How much satellite data is becoming obiquos, landsat has been publicly released and lot of services are starting to appear offering the data for free. That will enable tools like we are building for Google.org. People seem to be interested on collaborating with us on the deforestation tool as an open source project, so thats nice, we will see where it all gets, but a bonus motivation to do a great work for <a href=\"http://www.imazon.org.br/\">imazon</a>.</p>\n<p>After that I went to a session about <a href=\"http://mapnik.org/\">Mapnik</a> with <a href=\"http://twitter.com/#!/springmeyer\">Dane Springmeyer</a> hosting it. Pretty amazing what these guys are thinking. There was a lot of interesting discussion about how to enable different kinds of interactivity using <a href=\"https://github.com/mapbox/mbtiles-spec/blob/master/1.1/utfgrid.md\">UTF8Grids</a> and things like that. Also Dane is thinking hard how to improve performance in multiple fronts in mapnik so there is a lot of innovation going in this front. We discussed multiple ways to enable interactivity, vector vs tile, flash vs canvas… great discussion.</p>\n<p>After that went into a session with the <a href=\"http://twitter.com/#!/davetroy\">Dave Troy</a>, the creator of <a href=\"http://twittervision.com/\">TwitterVision</a>, do you remember? This application that started visualizing tweets on a map. He showed some really curious graphs on the amount of geolocated tweets, the locations, devices, etc. There were some curious things, like there is more absolute geolocated tweets in South America than in North America, the incredible importance of Indonesia where tweeting is a really big thing. He also talked about how to capture the stream of tweets, process them, etc.</p>\n<p>Later there was a session I organized about deforestation and Landsat imagery… I showed them and explained them what we are trying to do with <a href=\"http://www.visualraster.com/\">visualraster</a>. ESRI and BlueRaster have done the same already with Flex and Pixel Bender. We talked a bit if it would be possible to use Canvas or WebGL to perform similar things, but although I wanted to make it a technical discussion, it really did not happen.</p>\n<p>After than we went for beers, and had quite a lot of them! Talked with lot of people interesting stuff that I will be little by little assimilate and disseminate :) The guys from <a href=\"http://www.developmentseed.org/\">developmentseed</a> are awesome, we really share lot of things with them.</p>\n<p>There were lot of people interested on environment and conservation so we decided to organize this fall a #ecotechcamp in NY with at least  <a href=\"http://twitter.com/#!/nicopresto\">@nicopresto</a> and <a href=\"http://twitter.com/#!/robinkraft\">@robinkraft</a>. I am finding lot of interesting people outside the Biodiversity Informatics and Conservation world with lot of new ideas about how to use geo.</p>\n<p>Finally I want to thank all organizers and <a href=\"http://wherecampdc.org/2010/10/wherecampdc-sponsorships/\">sponsor</a> of the event, specially <a href=\"http://twitter.com/#!/kelsosCorner\">Nathaniel</a>, for their great job organizing everything. Seriously you guys rock.</p>\n<p>Now, when should we organize a #wherecampNY ??</p>","content_raw":"<p>Last week <a href=\"http://twitter.com/#!/jatorre\">@jatorre</a> had the opportunity to attend <a href=\"http://www.wherecampdc.org/\">#wherecampdc </a>in&nbsp;Washington&nbsp;DC. The event was a blast, lot of fun and interesting discussions. Here is a little report on what he found. In his own words...</p>\r\n<p>First of all&nbsp;It has been so far the best geo event I have ever been. The level of the discussions and the wiling of people to share was great.&nbsp;</p>\r\n<p>On Friday night there were the <a href=\"http://www.wherecampdc.org/2011/04/friday-ignite-spatial/\">ignite talks </a>when there were some good presentations. There was a presentation on pixel bender by a company called <a href=\"http://www.blueraster.com/\">Blueraster</a>, pretty much doing the same things we have <a href=\"http://mountainbiodiversity.org/\">done</a> <a href=\"http://smoothraster.appspot.com/\">with</a> <a href=\"http://biodivertido.blogspot.com/2009/12/recreating-european-starling-story.html\">it</a>. They do it based on the <a href=\"http://help.arcgis.com/en/webapi/flex/index.html\">ESRI Flex API</a>. There was one about Tilemill, nothing you dont know already, another about geocommons, opening their analysis capabilities we tried last Feb. Some others from National Geogrpahic, ESRI... well a bit of everything. I talked finally about OldWeather. And I think people liked it. Heare are the slides.</p>\r\n<p><iframe src=\"http://www.slideshare.net/slideshow/embed_code/8295807\" width=\"425\" height=\"355\" frameborder=\"0\" marginwidth=\"0\" marginheight=\"0\" scrolling=\"no\"></iframe></p>\r\n\r\n<p>Now the second day, it was the actual unconference. Never been before in an unconference and is a neat idea, people sef organize in topics for discussions at the beginning. I attended a talk on mobile data capturing tools and heard that basically everything still sucks and that is hard to get developing countries embrace technologies because of cost and things alike. A company called <a href=\"http://spatialnetworks.com/\">Spatial Networks </a>talked about some complete solutions for data capturing, free for non commercial use but not Open Source. Other really cool and inspiring project I learnt about was &nbsp;<a href=\"http://walking-papers.org/\">Walking Papers</a>, that now I learn that <a href=\"http://aaronland.info/\">Aaron</a> is involved. Aaron is a continuos surprise!</p>\r\n<p>Then I attended a lunch session about deforestation. How much satellite data is becoming obiquos, landsat has been publicly released and lot of services are starting to appear offering the data for free. That will enable tools like we are building for Google.org. People seem to be interested on collaborating with us on the deforestation tool as an open source project, so thats nice, we will see where it all gets, but a bonus motivation to do a great work for <a href=\"http://www.imazon.org.br/\">imazon</a>.</p>\r\n<p>After that I went to a session about <a href=\"http://mapnik.org/\">Mapnik</a> with <a href=\"http://twitter.com/#!/springmeyer\">Dane Springmeyer</a> hosting it. Pretty amazing what these guys are thinking. There was a lot of interesting discussion about how to enable different kinds of interactivity using <a href=\"https://github.com/mapbox/mbtiles-spec/blob/master/1.1/utfgrid.md\">UTF8Grids</a> and things like that. Also Dane is thinking hard how to improve performance in multiple fronts in mapnik so there is a lot of innovation going in this front. We discussed multiple ways to enable interactivity, vector vs tile, flash vs canvas... great discussion.</p>\r\n<p>After that went into a session with the <a href=\"http://twitter.com/#!/davetroy\">Dave Troy</a>, the creator of <a href=\"http://twittervision.com/\">TwitterVision</a>, do you remember? This application that started visualizing tweets on a map. He showed some really curious graphs on the amount of geolocated tweets, the locations, devices, etc.&nbsp;There were some curious things, like there is more absolute geolocated tweets in South America than in North America, the incredible importance of&nbsp;Indonesia&nbsp;where tweeting is a really big thing. He also talked about how to capture the stream of tweets, process them, etc.</p>\r\n<p>Later there was a session I organized about deforestation and Landsat imagery... I showed them and explained them what we are trying to do with <a href=\"http://www.visualraster.com/\">visualraster</a>. ESRI and BlueRaster have done the same already with Flex and Pixel Bender. We talked a bit if it would be possible to use Canvas or WebGL to perform similar things, but although I wanted to make it a technical discussion, it really did not happen.</p>\r\n<p>After than we went for beers, and had quite a lot of them! Talked with lot of people interesting stuff that I will be little by little assimilate and disseminate :) The guys from <a href=\"http://www.developmentseed.org/\">developmentseed</a> are awesome, we really share lot of things with them.</p>\r\n<p>There were lot of people interested on environment and conservation so we decided to organize this fall a #ecotechcamp&nbsp;in NY with at least &nbsp;<a href=\"http://twitter.com/#!/nicopresto\">@nicopresto</a>&nbsp;and <a href=\"http://twitter.com/#!/robinkraft\">@robinkraft</a>. I am finding lot of interesting people outside the Biodiversity Informatics and Conservation world with lot of new ideas about how to use geo.</p>\r\n<p>Finally I want to thank all organizers and <a href=\"http://wherecampdc.org/2010/10/wherecampdc-sponsorships/\">sponsor</a> of the event, specially <a href=\"http://twitter.com/#!/kelsosCorner\">Nathaniel</a>, for their great job organizing everything. Seriously you guys rock.</p>\r\n<p>Now, when should we organize a #wherecampNY ??</p>","is_current_item":true,"is_root_item":true}]}
publish: 2011-06-017
-->


#wherecampDC report
===================

Last week [@jatorre](http://twitter.com/#!/jatorre) had the opportunity
to attend [\#wherecampdc](http://www.wherecampdc.org/)in Washington DC.
The event was a blast, lot of fun and interesting discussions. Here is a
little report on what he found. In his own words…

First of all It has been so far the best geo event I have ever been. The
level of the discussions and the wiling of people to share was great. 

On Friday night there were the [ignite
talks](http://www.wherecampdc.org/2011/04/friday-ignite-spatial/)when
there were some good presentations. There was a presentation on pixel
bender by a company called [Blueraster](http://www.blueraster.com/),
pretty much doing the same things we have
[done](http://mountainbiodiversity.org/)
[with](http://smoothraster.appspot.com/)
[it](http://biodivertido.blogspot.com/2009/12/recreating-european-starling-story.html).
They do it based on the [ESRI Flex
API](http://help.arcgis.com/en/webapi/flex/index.html). There was one
about Tilemill, nothing you dont know already, another about geocommons,
opening their analysis capabilities we tried last Feb. Some others from
National Geogrpahic, ESRI… well a bit of everything. I talked finally
about OldWeather. And I think people liked it. Heare are the slides.

Now the second day, it was the actual unconference. Never been before in
an unconference and is a neat idea, people sef organize in topics for
discussions at the beginning. I attended a talk on mobile data capturing
tools and heard that basically everything still sucks and that is hard
to get developing countries embrace technologies because of cost and
things alike. A company called [Spatial
Networks](http://spatialnetworks.com/)talked about some complete
solutions for data capturing, free for non commercial use but not Open
Source. Other really cool and inspiring project I learnt about was
 [Walking Papers](http://walking-papers.org/), that now I learn that
[Aaron](http://aaronland.info/) is involved. Aaron is a continuos
surprise!

Then I attended a lunch session about deforestation. How much satellite
data is becoming obiquos, landsat has been publicly released and lot of
services are starting to appear offering the data for free. That will
enable tools like we are building for Google.org. People seem to be
interested on collaborating with us on the deforestation tool as an open
source project, so thats nice, we will see where it all gets, but a
bonus motivation to do a great work for
[imazon](http://www.imazon.org.br/).

After that I went to a session about [Mapnik](http://mapnik.org/) with
[Dane Springmeyer](http://twitter.com/#!/springmeyer) hosting it. Pretty
amazing what these guys are thinking. There was a lot of interesting
discussion about how to enable different kinds of interactivity using
[UTF8Grids](https://github.com/mapbox/mbtiles-spec/blob/master/1.1/utfgrid.md)
and things like that. Also Dane is thinking hard how to improve
performance in multiple fronts in mapnik so there is a lot of innovation
going in this front. We discussed multiple ways to enable interactivity,
vector vs tile, flash vs canvas… great discussion.

After that went into a session with the [Dave
Troy](http://twitter.com/#!/davetroy), the creator of
[TwitterVision](http://twittervision.com/), do you remember? This
application that started visualizing tweets on a map. He showed some
really curious graphs on the amount of geolocated tweets, the locations,
devices, etc. There were some curious things, like there is more
absolute geolocated tweets in South America than in North America, the
incredible importance of Indonesia where tweeting is a really big thing.
He also talked about how to capture the stream of tweets, process them,
etc.

Later there was a session I organized about deforestation and Landsat
imagery… I showed them and explained them what we are trying to do with
[visualraster](http://www.visualraster.com/). ESRI and BlueRaster have
done the same already with Flex and Pixel Bender. We talked a bit if it
would be possible to use Canvas or WebGL to perform similar things, but
although I wanted to make it a technical discussion, it really did not
happen.

After than we went for beers, and had quite a lot of them! Talked with
lot of people interesting stuff that I will be little by little
assimilate and disseminate :) The guys from
[developmentseed](http://www.developmentseed.org/) are awesome, we
really share lot of things with them.

There were lot of people interested on environment and conservation so
we decided to organize this fall a \#ecotechcamp in NY with at least
 [@nicopresto](http://twitter.com/#!/nicopresto) and
[@robinkraft](http://twitter.com/#!/robinkraft). I am finding lot of
interesting people outside the Biodiversity Informatics and Conservation
world with lot of new ideas about how to use geo.

Finally I want to thank all organizers and
[sponsor](http://wherecampdc.org/2010/10/wherecampdc-sponsorships/) of
the event, specially [Nathaniel](http://twitter.com/#!/kelsosCorner),
for their great job organizing everything. Seriously you guys rock.

Now, when should we organize a \#wherecampNY ??

