---
title: 	Vizzuality has quadruplets!
date:	2015-02-20
author:	Jamie Gibson
---

We are happy to welcome four new members of staff to the team, expanding
our capacity and allowing us to continue delivering award-winning
products that have real impact across the world.

![Alicia Arenzana](/assets/images/team/alicia.png)

[Alicia Arenzana](http://www.vizzuality.com/team/alicia_arenzana) joins
us as our first official data scientist. Her mission is to hunt for data
and to help organise it in a way which reveals the inner workings of
social and environmental processes. Alicia brings her eye for detail and
perfection to the task of quality assurance, making sure our products
are pixel perfect, bug-free and ready to be unleashed to the world.

Alicia is currently finishing a masters course in Environmental
Engineering from the Universidad Politécnica de Madrid, and is
fascinated by nature. She can often be found walking through the hills
and fields around Madrid at the weekend or playing with APIs to scrape
data from the web.

![Liuba Cordie](/assets/images/team/liuba.jpg)

[Liuba Cordie](http://www.vizzuality.com/team/liuba_cordie) also joins
us in Madrid as our Operations expert. She will be the heart that keeps
the Vizzuality body functioning at full capacity, and we are very
excited to have her on board. Liuba comes with over a decade of
experience in operations and administration across many different
sectors.

Liuba has seen a lot of the world in her life, and has worked everywhere
from Madrid to Dubai. She’s extremely glad that her three very
well-behaved children love to fly with her. The best thing about moving
to Madrid is the amazing variety and quality of food on offer, and Liuba
is looking forward to exploring it with us at Vizzuality.

![Miguel Barrenechea](/assets/images/team/Miguel.jpg)

[Miguel Barrenechea](http://www.vizzuality.com/team/miguel_barrenechea)
joins our growing Engineering team in Madrid as a Front-end Developer to
support us on a range of projects, including
[GFW](http://www.vizzuality.com/projects/globalforestwatch). He brings
two years of experience and a Masters in Front-end Development with him.
Miguel started out as an Economist before retraining as a developer, so
he adds another discipline to our wide range of experience (including
Agricultural Engineering, Geography, Brand development, Marketing,
Engineering, Marine Biology and many more). As well as his love of css
and javascript, Miguel also brings his particular northern Spanish
flavour to the company.

![Jamie Gibson](/assets/images/team/jamie-gibson.jpg)

[Jamie Gibson](http://www.vizzuality.com/team/jamie_gibson) joins our
new Cambridge team as Vizzuality’s Social Scientist. Humans understand
and make sense of the world in a number of ways, and it is crucial for
the success of our products that we research and learn about these
processes. Jamie will work with our designers and engineers, as well as
partners and potential users, to ensure our products fit well into the
lives of our users and deliver information and delight.  

Jamie comes to Vizzuality after two years working with the United
Nations Environment Programme on projects to help governments manage
environmental information. A geographer by trade, we are looking forward
to his unique ‘style’ of hair and telling jokes.  

