<!--
slug: thought-for-food
date: Thu Mar 19 2015 13:09:42 GMT+0000 (GMT)
tags: 
title: Thought for Food
id: 114042422481
link: http://blog.vizzuality.com/post/114042422481/thought-for-food
raw: {"blog_name":"vizzuality","id":114042422481,"post_url":"http://blog.vizzuality.com/post/114042422481/thought-for-food","slug":"thought-for-food","type":"text","date":"2015-03-19 13:09:42 GMT","timestamp":1426770582,"state":"published","format":"html","reblog_key":"bXwBrO72","tags":[],"short_url":"http://tmblr.co/ZQVgQy1gDTKJH","highlighted":[],"note_count":1,"title":"Thought for Food","body":"<h2>We&rsquo;re bringing satellite data to smallholders</h2><figure data-orig-width=\"2048\" data-orig-height=\"1365\" style=\"margin: 20px 0 30px 0;text-align: center;\"><img src=\"https://40.media.tumblr.com/db31019726a116c9ca9369b6b1500469/tumblr_inline_nlgmcvdhcT1tn8nre_500.jpg\" data-orig-width=\"2048\" data-orig-height=\"1365\" alt=\"image\"/></figure><p>Vizzuality are embarking on a major new research project with the Zeitz Foundation, which aims to empower thousands of the poorest farmers in Kenya with big data insights to tackle the key issues limiting their food security. We will be working with smallholder farmers in Laikipia County to build a system that distills a range of different types of data, from satellite observation to market prices, into SMS messages sent to farmers’ phones. This data would also be available on a dashboard-style web application, allowing interested users (like regional government staff or NGOs) to analyse multiple farms at the same time. In this post we explain why we’re doing this work and what we hope to achieve.</p><figure data-orig-width=\"1200\" data-orig-height=\"870\" style=\"margin: 30px 0;text-align: center;\"><img src=\"https://40.media.tumblr.com/55344029a0d69a3c7ae580dbe2da60bb/tumblr_inline_nlgmexrYhd1tn8nre_500.png\" data-orig-width=\"1200\" data-orig-height=\"870\" alt=\"image\"/></figure><h2>Farming faces many threats</h2><p>In Laikipia County, there are three main environmental issues limiting farm productivity. Above all is the impact of climate change. The Kenyan Government is expecting both more flooding and drought, as rainfall becomes more unpredictable, and models suggest temperatures could rise by at least 3ºC by the end of the century. On top of this is the increasing demand for water from a growing population and booming agricultural businesses. Third is the risk posed by wild animals, particularly elephants, that can destroy crops, livestock and buildings. </p><p>A further issue facing smallholder farming comes from low access to markets, which reduces opportunities to access productive inputs and earn revenue from any excess output. This in turn can reduce the ability of smallholder farmers to continue farming into the future. It is for this reason that the African Smallholder Farmers’ Group has put market access as one of its 5 pillars for improving smallholder livelihoods.<br/></p><p>There are a number of different initiatives, spearheaded by some of the biggest donors and research organisations in the world, exploring new techniques to overcome these threats. Existing work by the Zeitz Foundation in Laikipia suggests that Conservation Agriculture, Rainwater Harvesting and Human Wildlife Conflict mitigation have the potential to dramatically increase the productivity of smallholder farms in the area. <br/></p><h2>More and more farmers find information on their phones</h2><p>Another method used to improve smallholder productivity has been to develop information systems that deliver information, on things like weather or market prices, through SMS services. One such service in East Africa already sends 30,000 SMS messages a month; so there is clearly a lot of potential there. However, reports by the FAO and USAID suggest that women are less able to access these services than men; working with the Zeitz Foundation and communities in Laikipia, we also hope to redress the gender imbalance of the audience.  </p><figure data-orig-width=\"1200\" data-orig-height=\"870\" style=\"margin: 30px 0;text-align: center;\"><img src=\"https://40.media.tumblr.com/9f115763c0782b558521d28e8d4f581d/tumblr_inline_nlgmfl09dU1tn8nre_500.png\" data-orig-width=\"1200\" data-orig-height=\"870\" alt=\"image\"/></figure><p>In the future, we will be able to do more than just text smallholders. Research suggests that the trend in mobile ownership and use is only likely to accelerate into the future: it is anticipated that 4bn adults will own a smartphone by 2020, and around 300 million people in the Middle East and Africa region should have access to a 4G network. Within a few short years we will be able to send customised maps and rich visualisations to help smallholders plan and manage their land more effectively, and level the playing field in terms of access to information. </p><h2>Straight from satellites to SMS</h2><p>The most exciting part of this project for us is the potential to work with big earth observation data to provide cheap and timely insights on a whole range of environmental parameters. Smallholders are rarely able to access the knowledge we gain from satellites, like land cover change and weather prediction. With the ESA and NASA both launching more powerful satellites, able to tell us more about our planet than ever before, now is the time to pair this capability with the needs of some of the poorest people in the world. If we can build a system that presents this data to smallholders in a clear, relevant way, it could unlock the massive potential of smallholder populations.  </p><h2>Giving smallholders the tools to secure their own livelihoods</h2><figure data-orig-width=\"1200\" data-orig-height=\"870\" style=\"margin: 20px 0 30px 0;text-align: center;\"><img src=\"https://40.media.tumblr.com/afbd9213dd71828957b4c6554ca5059f/tumblr_inline_nlgmgdg7NE1tn8nre_500.png\" data-orig-width=\"1200\" data-orig-height=\"870\" alt=\"image\"/></figure><p>What we want to do with this project is build a system that gives smallholders the information they need, in their hands right when they need it, to build more productive, climate and biodiversity smart farming systems. With this, smallholders can learn about upcoming weather events to prepare for (flooding, drought), market opportunities and new techniques which can improve their productivity. They could then provide feedback on how successful certain innovations were, or propose their own proven technique for others to learn from and use.</p><p>Powerful information, conveyed clearly, to improve the lives of some of the poorest people in the world and their environment; this is what we do. We look forward to updating you on our progress as we discover what is possible.</p><h2>Further Reading</h2><p>African Smallholder Farmers Group, 2013. <a href=\"http://www.asfg.org.uk/downloads/ASFG-Framework-Report.pdf\">Supporting Smallholder Farmers in Africa: a Framework for an Enabling Environment.</a> </p><p>Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, 2011. <a href=\"http://www.fao.org/docrep/013/i2050e/i2050e.pdf\">The state of food and agriculture 2010-2011: Women in Agriculture &ndash; closing the gender gap for development</a>. </p><p>Graham, M.D. &amp; Ochieng, T., 2008. <a href=\"https://www.spaceforgiants.org/sites/default/files/Farm%20based%20deterrents%20for%20mitigating%20human%20elephant%20conflict.pdf\">Uptake and performance of farm-based measures for reducing crop raiding by elephants Loxodonta africana among smallholder farms in Laikipia District, Kenya</a>. Oryx, 42(1), pp.76–82. </p><p>Manfre, C. &amp; Nordehn, C., 2013. <a href=\"https://dl.dropboxusercontent.com/u/15810717/MEAS%20Case%20Studies/MEAS%20CS%20Kenya%20-%20Women%20and%20ICT%20-%20Manfre%20et%20al%20-%20August%202013.pdf\">Exploring the Promise of Information and Communication Technologies for Women Farmers in Kenya</a>. </p><p>Otieno, G. et al., 2014. <a href=\"http://www.malariajournal.com/content/13/1/44\">The feasibility, patterns of use and acceptability of using mobile phone text-messaging to improve treatment adherence and post-treatment review of children with uncomplicated malaria in western Kenya</a>. Malaria journal, 13(1), p.44.. </p><p><a href=\"http://ag4impact.org/news/no-ordinary-matter-conserving-restoring-and-enhancing-africas-soils-2014/\"></a>The Montpellier Panel, 2014. <a href=\"http://ag4impact.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/12/MP_0106_Soil_Report_LR1.pdf\">No Ordinary Matter: Conserving, Restoring and Enhancing Africa’s Soils</a>.<br/></p>","reblog":{"tree_html":"","comment":"<h2>We&rsquo;re bringing satellite data to smallholders</h2><figure data-orig-width=\"2048\" data-orig-height=\"1365\" style=\"margin: 20px 0 30px 0;text-align: center;\"><img src=\"https://40.media.tumblr.com/db31019726a116c9ca9369b6b1500469/tumblr_inline_nlgmcvdhcT1tn8nre_500.jpg\" data-orig-width=\"2048\" data-orig-height=\"1365\" alt=\"image\"></figure><p>Vizzuality are embarking on a major new research project with the Zeitz Foundation, which aims to empower thousands of the poorest farmers in Kenya with big data insights to tackle the key issues limiting their food security. We will be working with smallholder farmers in Laikipia County to build a system that distills a range of different types of data, from satellite observation to market prices, into SMS messages sent to farmers&rsquo; phones. This data would also be available on a dashboard-style web application, allowing interested users (like regional government staff or NGOs) to analyse multiple farms at the same time. In this post we explain why we&rsquo;re doing this work and what we hope to achieve.</p><figure data-orig-width=\"1200\" data-orig-height=\"870\" style=\"margin: 30px 0;text-align: center;\"><img src=\"https://40.media.tumblr.com/55344029a0d69a3c7ae580dbe2da60bb/tumblr_inline_nlgmexrYhd1tn8nre_500.png\" data-orig-width=\"1200\" data-orig-height=\"870\" alt=\"image\"></figure><h2>Farming faces many threats</h2><p>In Laikipia County, there are three main environmental issues limiting farm productivity. Above all is the impact of climate change. The Kenyan Government is expecting both more flooding and drought, as rainfall becomes more unpredictable, and models suggest temperatures could rise by at least 3&ordm;C by the end of the century. On top of this is the increasing demand for water from a growing population and booming agricultural businesses. Third is the risk posed by wild animals, particularly elephants, that can destroy crops, livestock and buildings. </p><p>A further issue facing smallholder farming comes from low access to markets, which reduces opportunities to access productive inputs and earn revenue from any excess output. This in turn can reduce the ability of smallholder farmers to continue farming into the future. It is for this reason that the African Smallholder Farmers&rsquo; Group has put market access as one of its 5 pillars for improving smallholder livelihoods.<br></p><p>There are a number of different initiatives, spearheaded by some of the biggest donors and research organisations in the world, exploring new techniques to overcome these threats. Existing work by the Zeitz Foundation in Laikipia suggests that Conservation Agriculture, Rainwater Harvesting and Human Wildlife Conflict mitigation have the potential to dramatically increase the productivity of smallholder farms in the area. <br></p><h2>More and more farmers find information on their phones</h2><p>Another method used to improve smallholder productivity has been to develop information systems that deliver information, on things like weather or market prices, through SMS services. One such service in East Africa already sends 30,000 SMS messages a month; so there is clearly a lot of potential there. However, reports by the FAO and USAID suggest that women are less able to access these services than men; working with the Zeitz Foundation and communities in Laikipia, we also hope to redress the gender imbalance of the audience. &nbsp;</p><figure data-orig-width=\"1200\" data-orig-height=\"870\" style=\"margin: 30px 0;text-align: center;\"><img src=\"https://40.media.tumblr.com/9f115763c0782b558521d28e8d4f581d/tumblr_inline_nlgmfl09dU1tn8nre_500.png\" data-orig-width=\"1200\" data-orig-height=\"870\" alt=\"image\"></figure><p>In the future, we will be able to do more than just text smallholders. Research suggests that the trend in mobile ownership and use is only likely to accelerate into the future: it is anticipated that 4bn adults will own a smartphone by 2020, and around 300 million people in the Middle East and Africa region should have access to a 4G network. Within a few short years we will be able to send customised maps and rich visualisations to help smallholders plan and manage their land more effectively, and level the playing field in terms of access to information. </p><h2>Straight from satellites to SMS</h2><p>The most exciting part of this project for us is the potential to work with big earth observation data to provide cheap and timely insights on a whole range of environmental parameters. Smallholders are rarely able to access the knowledge we gain from satellites, like land cover change and weather prediction. With the ESA and NASA both launching more powerful satellites, able to tell us more about our planet than ever before, now is the time to pair this capability with the needs of some of the poorest people in the world. If we can build a system that presents this data to smallholders in a clear, relevant way, it could unlock the massive potential of smallholder populations. &nbsp;</p><h2>Giving smallholders the tools to secure their own livelihoods</h2><figure data-orig-width=\"1200\" data-orig-height=\"870\" style=\"margin: 20px 0 30px 0;text-align: center;\"><img src=\"https://40.media.tumblr.com/afbd9213dd71828957b4c6554ca5059f/tumblr_inline_nlgmgdg7NE1tn8nre_500.png\" data-orig-width=\"1200\" data-orig-height=\"870\" alt=\"image\"></figure><p>What we want to do with this project is build a system that gives smallholders the information they need, in their hands right when they need it, to build more productive, climate and biodiversity smart farming systems. With this, smallholders can learn about upcoming weather events to prepare for (flooding, drought), market opportunities and new techniques which can improve their productivity. They could then provide feedback on how successful certain innovations were, or propose their own proven technique for others to learn from and use.</p><p>Powerful information, conveyed clearly, to improve the lives of some of the poorest people in the world and their environment; this is what we do. We look forward to updating you on our progress as we discover what is possible.</p><h2>Further Reading</h2><p>African Smallholder Farmers Group, 2013. <a href=\"http://www.asfg.org.uk/downloads/ASFG-Framework-Report.pdf\">Supporting Smallholder Farmers in Africa: a Framework for an Enabling Environment.</a> </p><p>Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, 2011. <a href=\"http://www.fao.org/docrep/013/i2050e/i2050e.pdf\">The state of food and agriculture 2010-2011: Women in Agriculture &ndash; closing the gender gap for development</a>. </p><p>Graham, M.D. &amp; Ochieng, T., 2008. <a href=\"https://www.spaceforgiants.org/sites/default/files/Farm%20based%20deterrents%20for%20mitigating%20human%20elephant%20conflict.pdf\">Uptake and performance of farm-based measures for reducing crop raiding by elephants Loxodonta africana among smallholder farms in Laikipia District, Kenya</a>. Oryx, 42(1), pp.76&ndash;82. </p><p>Manfre, C. &amp; Nordehn, C., 2013. <a href=\"https://dl.dropboxusercontent.com/u/15810717/MEAS%20Case%20Studies/MEAS%20CS%20Kenya%20-%20Women%20and%20ICT%20-%20Manfre%20et%20al%20-%20August%202013.pdf\">Exploring the Promise of Information and Communication Technologies for Women Farmers in Kenya</a>. </p><p>Otieno, G. et al., 2014. <a href=\"http://www.malariajournal.com/content/13/1/44\">The feasibility, patterns of use and acceptability of using mobile phone text-messaging to improve treatment adherence and post-treatment review of children with uncomplicated malaria in western Kenya</a>. Malaria journal, 13(1), p.44.. </p><p><a href=\"http://ag4impact.org/news/no-ordinary-matter-conserving-restoring-and-enhancing-africas-soils-2014/\"></a>The Montpellier Panel, 2014. <a href=\"http://ag4impact.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/12/MP_0106_Soil_Report_LR1.pdf\">No Ordinary Matter: Conserving, Restoring and Enhancing Africa&rsquo;s Soils</a>.<br></p>"},"trail":[{"blog":{"name":"vizzuality","theme":{"avatar_shape":"square","background_color":"#FAFAFA","body_font":"Helvetica Neue","header_bounds":"","header_image":"http://assets.tumblr.com/images/default_header/optica_pattern_09.png?_v=abe6f565397f54e880c2b76e6fc2022e","header_image_focused":"http://assets.tumblr.com/images/default_header/optica_pattern_09_focused_v3.png?_v=abe6f565397f54e880c2b76e6fc2022e","header_image_scaled":"http://assets.tumblr.com/images/default_header/optica_pattern_09_focused_v3.png?_v=abe6f565397f54e880c2b76e6fc2022e","header_stretch":true,"link_color":"#529ECC","show_avatar":true,"show_description":true,"show_header_image":true,"show_title":true,"title_color":"#444444","title_font":"Gibson","title_font_weight":"bold"}},"post":{"id":"114042422481"},"content":"<h2>We’re bringing satellite data to smallholders</h2><figure data-orig-width=\"2048\" data-orig-height=\"1365\" style=\"margin: 20px 0 30px 0;text-align: center;\"><img src=\"https://40.media.tumblr.com/db31019726a116c9ca9369b6b1500469/tumblr_inline_nlgmcvdhcT1tn8nre_500.jpg\" data-orig-width=\"2048\" data-orig-height=\"1365\" alt=\"image\"></figure><p>Vizzuality are embarking on a major new research project with the Zeitz Foundation, which aims to empower thousands of the poorest farmers in Kenya with big data insights to tackle the key issues limiting their food security. We will be working with smallholder farmers in Laikipia County to build a system that distills a range of different types of data, from satellite observation to market prices, into SMS messages sent to farmers’ phones. This data would also be available on a dashboard-style web application, allowing interested users (like regional government staff or NGOs) to analyse multiple farms at the same time. In this post we explain why we’re doing this work and what we hope to achieve.</p><figure data-orig-width=\"1200\" data-orig-height=\"870\" style=\"margin: 30px 0;text-align: center;\"><img src=\"https://40.media.tumblr.com/55344029a0d69a3c7ae580dbe2da60bb/tumblr_inline_nlgmexrYhd1tn8nre_500.png\" data-orig-width=\"1200\" data-orig-height=\"870\" alt=\"image\"></figure><h2>Farming faces many threats</h2><p>In Laikipia County, there are three main environmental issues limiting farm productivity. Above all is the impact of climate change. The Kenyan Government is expecting both more flooding and drought, as rainfall becomes more unpredictable, and models suggest temperatures could rise by at least 3ºC by the end of the century. On top of this is the increasing demand for water from a growing population and booming agricultural businesses. Third is the risk posed by wild animals, particularly elephants, that can destroy crops, livestock and buildings. </p><p>A further issue facing smallholder farming comes from low access to markets, which reduces opportunities to access productive inputs and earn revenue from any excess output. This in turn can reduce the ability of smallholder farmers to continue farming into the future. It is for this reason that the African Smallholder Farmers’ Group has put market access as one of its 5 pillars for improving smallholder livelihoods.<br></p><p>There are a number of different initiatives, spearheaded by some of the biggest donors and research organisations in the world, exploring new techniques to overcome these threats. Existing work by the Zeitz Foundation in Laikipia suggests that Conservation Agriculture, Rainwater Harvesting and Human Wildlife Conflict mitigation have the potential to dramatically increase the productivity of smallholder farms in the area. <br></p><h2>More and more farmers find information on their phones</h2><p>Another method used to improve smallholder productivity has been to develop information systems that deliver information, on things like weather or market prices, through SMS services. One such service in East Africa already sends 30,000 SMS messages a month; so there is clearly a lot of potential there. However, reports by the FAO and USAID suggest that women are less able to access these services than men; working with the Zeitz Foundation and communities in Laikipia, we also hope to redress the gender imbalance of the audience.  </p><figure data-orig-width=\"1200\" data-orig-height=\"870\" style=\"margin: 30px 0;text-align: center;\"><img src=\"https://40.media.tumblr.com/9f115763c0782b558521d28e8d4f581d/tumblr_inline_nlgmfl09dU1tn8nre_500.png\" data-orig-width=\"1200\" data-orig-height=\"870\" alt=\"image\"></figure><p>In the future, we will be able to do more than just text smallholders. Research suggests that the trend in mobile ownership and use is only likely to accelerate into the future: it is anticipated that 4bn adults will own a smartphone by 2020, and around 300 million people in the Middle East and Africa region should have access to a 4G network. Within a few short years we will be able to send customised maps and rich visualisations to help smallholders plan and manage their land more effectively, and level the playing field in terms of access to information. </p><h2>Straight from satellites to SMS</h2><p>The most exciting part of this project for us is the potential to work with big earth observation data to provide cheap and timely insights on a whole range of environmental parameters. Smallholders are rarely able to access the knowledge we gain from satellites, like land cover change and weather prediction. With the ESA and NASA both launching more powerful satellites, able to tell us more about our planet than ever before, now is the time to pair this capability with the needs of some of the poorest people in the world. If we can build a system that presents this data to smallholders in a clear, relevant way, it could unlock the massive potential of smallholder populations.  </p><h2>Giving smallholders the tools to secure their own livelihoods</h2><figure data-orig-width=\"1200\" data-orig-height=\"870\" style=\"margin: 20px 0 30px 0;text-align: center;\"><img src=\"https://40.media.tumblr.com/afbd9213dd71828957b4c6554ca5059f/tumblr_inline_nlgmgdg7NE1tn8nre_500.png\" data-orig-width=\"1200\" data-orig-height=\"870\" alt=\"image\"></figure><p>What we want to do with this project is build a system that gives smallholders the information they need, in their hands right when they need it, to build more productive, climate and biodiversity smart farming systems. With this, smallholders can learn about upcoming weather events to prepare for (flooding, drought), market opportunities and new techniques which can improve their productivity. They could then provide feedback on how successful certain innovations were, or propose their own proven technique for others to learn from and use.</p><p>Powerful information, conveyed clearly, to improve the lives of some of the poorest people in the world and their environment; this is what we do. We look forward to updating you on our progress as we discover what is possible.</p><h2>Further Reading</h2><p>African Smallholder Farmers Group, 2013. <a href=\"http://www.asfg.org.uk/downloads/ASFG-Framework-Report.pdf\">Supporting Smallholder Farmers in Africa: a Framework for an Enabling Environment.</a> </p><p>Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, 2011. <a href=\"http://www.fao.org/docrep/013/i2050e/i2050e.pdf\">The state of food and agriculture 2010-2011: Women in Agriculture – closing the gender gap for development</a>. </p><p>Graham, M.D. & Ochieng, T., 2008. <a href=\"https://www.spaceforgiants.org/sites/default/files/Farm%20based%20deterrents%20for%20mitigating%20human%20elephant%20conflict.pdf\">Uptake and performance of farm-based measures for reducing crop raiding by elephants Loxodonta africana among smallholder farms in Laikipia District, Kenya</a>. Oryx, 42(1), pp.76–82. </p><p>Manfre, C. & Nordehn, C., 2013. <a href=\"https://dl.dropboxusercontent.com/u/15810717/MEAS%20Case%20Studies/MEAS%20CS%20Kenya%20-%20Women%20and%20ICT%20-%20Manfre%20et%20al%20-%20August%202013.pdf\">Exploring the Promise of Information and Communication Technologies for Women Farmers in Kenya</a>. </p><p>Otieno, G. et al., 2014. <a href=\"http://www.malariajournal.com/content/13/1/44\">The feasibility, patterns of use and acceptability of using mobile phone text-messaging to improve treatment adherence and post-treatment review of children with uncomplicated malaria in western Kenya</a>. Malaria journal, 13(1), p.44.. </p><p><a href=\"http://ag4impact.org/news/no-ordinary-matter-conserving-restoring-and-enhancing-africas-soils-2014/\"></a>The Montpellier Panel, 2014. <a href=\"http://ag4impact.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/12/MP_0106_Soil_Report_LR1.pdf\">No Ordinary Matter: Conserving, Restoring and Enhancing Africa’s Soils</a>.<br></p>","content_raw":"<h2>We're bringing satellite data to smallholders</h2><figure data-orig-width=\"2048\" data-orig-height=\"1365\" style=\"margin: 20px 0 30px 0;text-align: center;\"><img src=\"https://40.media.tumblr.com/db31019726a116c9ca9369b6b1500469/tumblr_inline_nlgmcvdhcT1tn8nre_500.jpg\" data-orig-width=\"2048\" data-orig-height=\"1365\" alt=\"image\"></figure><p>Vizzuality are embarking on a major new research project with the Zeitz Foundation, which aims to empower thousands of the poorest farmers in Kenya with big data insights to tackle the key issues limiting their food security. We will be working with smallholder farmers in Laikipia County to build a system that distills a range of different types of data, from satellite observation to market prices, into SMS messages sent to farmers&rsquo; phones. This data would also be available on a dashboard-style web application, allowing interested users (like regional government staff or NGOs) to analyse multiple farms at the same time. In this post we explain why we&rsquo;re doing this work and what we hope to achieve.</p><figure data-orig-width=\"1200\" data-orig-height=\"870\" style=\"margin: 30px 0;text-align: center;\"><img src=\"https://40.media.tumblr.com/55344029a0d69a3c7ae580dbe2da60bb/tumblr_inline_nlgmexrYhd1tn8nre_500.png\" data-orig-width=\"1200\" data-orig-height=\"870\" alt=\"image\"></figure><h2>Farming faces many threats</h2><p>In Laikipia County, there are three main environmental issues limiting farm productivity. Above all is the impact of climate change. The Kenyan Government is expecting both more flooding and drought, as rainfall becomes more unpredictable, and models suggest temperatures could rise by at least 3&ordm;C by the end of the century. On top of this is the increasing demand for water from a growing population and booming agricultural businesses. Third is the risk posed by wild animals, particularly elephants, that can destroy crops, livestock and buildings. </p><p>A further issue facing smallholder farming comes from low access to markets, which reduces opportunities to access productive inputs and earn revenue from any excess output. This in turn can reduce the ability of smallholder farmers to continue farming into the future. It is for this reason that the African Smallholder Farmers&rsquo; Group has put market access as one of its 5 pillars for improving smallholder livelihoods.<br></p><p>There are a number of different initiatives, spearheaded by some of the biggest donors and research organisations in the world, exploring new techniques to overcome these threats. Existing work by the Zeitz Foundation in Laikipia suggests that Conservation Agriculture, Rainwater Harvesting and Human Wildlife Conflict mitigation have the potential to dramatically increase the productivity of smallholder farms in the area. <br></p><h2>More and more farmers find information on their phones</h2><p>Another method used to improve smallholder productivity has been to develop information systems that deliver information, on things like weather or market prices, through SMS services. One such service in East Africa already sends 30,000 SMS messages a month; so there is clearly a lot of potential there. However, reports by the FAO and USAID suggest that women are less able to access these services than men; working with the Zeitz Foundation and communities in Laikipia, we also hope to redress the gender imbalance of the audience. &nbsp;</p><figure data-orig-width=\"1200\" data-orig-height=\"870\" style=\"margin: 30px 0;text-align: center;\"><img src=\"https://40.media.tumblr.com/9f115763c0782b558521d28e8d4f581d/tumblr_inline_nlgmfl09dU1tn8nre_500.png\" data-orig-width=\"1200\" data-orig-height=\"870\" alt=\"image\"></figure><p>In the future, we will be able to do more than just text smallholders. Research suggests that the trend in mobile ownership and use is only likely to accelerate into the future: it is anticipated that 4bn adults will own a smartphone by 2020, and around 300 million people in the Middle East and Africa region should have access to a 4G network. Within a few short years we will be able to send customised maps and rich visualisations to help smallholders plan and manage their land more effectively, and level the playing field in terms of access to information. </p><h2>Straight from satellites to SMS</h2><p>The most exciting part of this project for us is the potential to work with big earth observation data to provide cheap and timely insights on a whole range of environmental parameters. Smallholders are rarely able to access the knowledge we gain from satellites, like land cover change and weather prediction. With the ESA and NASA both launching more powerful satellites, able to tell us more about our planet than ever before, now is the time to pair this capability with the needs of some of the poorest people in the world. If we can build a system that presents this data to smallholders in a clear, relevant way, it could unlock the massive potential of smallholder populations. &nbsp;</p><h2>Giving smallholders the tools to secure their own livelihoods</h2><figure data-orig-width=\"1200\" data-orig-height=\"870\" style=\"margin: 20px 0 30px 0;text-align: center;\"><img src=\"https://40.media.tumblr.com/afbd9213dd71828957b4c6554ca5059f/tumblr_inline_nlgmgdg7NE1tn8nre_500.png\" data-orig-width=\"1200\" data-orig-height=\"870\" alt=\"image\"></figure><p>What we want to do with this project is build a system that gives smallholders the information they need, in their hands right when they need it, to build more productive, climate and biodiversity smart farming systems. With this, smallholders can learn about upcoming weather events to prepare for (flooding, drought), market opportunities and new techniques which can improve their productivity. They could then provide feedback on how successful certain innovations were, or propose their own proven technique for others to learn from and use.</p><p>Powerful information, conveyed clearly, to improve the lives of some of the poorest people in the world and their environment; this is what we do. We look forward to updating you on our progress as we discover what is possible.</p><h2>Further Reading</h2><p>African Smallholder Farmers Group, 2013. <a href=\"http://www.asfg.org.uk/downloads/ASFG-Framework-Report.pdf\">Supporting Smallholder Farmers in Africa: a Framework for an Enabling Environment.</a> </p><p>\t\t \t \t \t\t\t\t\t\t\t\t</p><p>Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, 2011. <a href=\"http://www.fao.org/docrep/013/i2050e/i2050e.pdf\">The state of food and agriculture 2010-2011: Women in Agriculture -- closing the gender gap for development</a>. </p><p>\t</p><p>Graham, M.D. &amp; Ochieng, T., 2008. <a href=\"https://www.spaceforgiants.org/sites/default/files/Farm%20based%20deterrents%20for%20mitigating%20human%20elephant%20conflict.pdf\">Uptake and performance of farm-based measures for reducing crop raiding by elephants Loxodonta africana among smallholder farms in Laikipia District, Kenya</a>. Oryx, 42(1), pp.76&ndash;82. </p><p>\t\t\t\t\t</p><p>Manfre, C. &amp; Nordehn, C., 2013. <a href=\"https://dl.dropboxusercontent.com/u/15810717/MEAS%20Case%20Studies/MEAS%20CS%20Kenya%20-%20Women%20and%20ICT%20-%20Manfre%20et%20al%20-%20August%202013.pdf\">Exploring the Promise of Information and Communication Technologies for Women Farmers in Kenya</a>. </p><p>Otieno, G. et al., 2014. <a href=\"http://www.malariajournal.com/content/13/1/44\">The feasibility, patterns of use and acceptability of using mobile phone text-messaging to improve treatment adherence and post-treatment review of children with uncomplicated malaria in western Kenya</a>. Malaria journal, 13(1), p.44.. </p><p>\t\t\t\t\t\t</p><p><a href=\"http://ag4impact.org/news/no-ordinary-matter-conserving-restoring-and-enhancing-africas-soils-2014/\"></a>The Montpellier Panel, 2014. <a href=\"http://ag4impact.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/12/MP_0106_Soil_Report_LR1.pdf\">No Ordinary Matter: Conserving, Restoring and Enhancing Africa&rsquo;s Soils</a>.<br></p>","is_current_item":true,"is_root_item":true}]}
publish: 2015-03-019
-->


Thought for Food
================

We’re bringing satellite data to smallholders
---------------------------------------------

![image](https://40.media.tumblr.com/db31019726a116c9ca9369b6b1500469/tumblr_inline_nlgmcvdhcT1tn8nre_500.jpg)

Vizzuality are embarking on a major new research project with the Zeitz
Foundation, which aims to empower thousands of the poorest farmers in
Kenya with big data insights to tackle the key issues limiting their
food security. We will be working with smallholder farmers in Laikipia
County to build a system that distills a range of different types of
data, from satellite observation to market prices, into SMS messages
sent to farmers’ phones. This data would also be available on a
dashboard-style web application, allowing interested users (like
regional government staff or NGOs) to analyse multiple farms at the same
time. In this post we explain why we’re doing this work and what we hope
to achieve.

![image](https://40.media.tumblr.com/55344029a0d69a3c7ae580dbe2da60bb/tumblr_inline_nlgmexrYhd1tn8nre_500.png)

Farming faces many threats
--------------------------

In Laikipia County, there are three main environmental issues limiting
farm productivity. Above all is the impact of climate change. The Kenyan
Government is expecting both more flooding and drought, as rainfall
becomes more unpredictable, and models suggest temperatures could rise
by at least 3ºC by the end of the century. On top of this is the
increasing demand for water from a growing population and booming
agricultural businesses. Third is the risk posed by wild animals,
particularly elephants, that can destroy crops, livestock and buildings.

A further issue facing smallholder farming comes from low access to
markets, which reduces opportunities to access productive inputs and
earn revenue from any excess output. This in turn can reduce the ability
of smallholder farmers to continue farming into the future. It is for
this reason that the African Smallholder Farmers’ Group has put market
access as one of its 5 pillars for improving smallholder livelihoods.\

There are a number of different initiatives, spearheaded by some of the
biggest donors and research organisations in the world, exploring new
techniques to overcome these threats. Existing work by the Zeitz
Foundation in Laikipia suggests that Conservation Agriculture, Rainwater
Harvesting and Human Wildlife Conflict mitigation have the potential to
dramatically increase the productivity of smallholder farms in the
area.\

More and more farmers find information on their phones
------------------------------------------------------

Another method used to improve smallholder productivity has been to
develop information systems that deliver information, on things like
weather or market prices, through SMS services. One such service in East
Africa already sends 30,000 SMS messages a month; so there is clearly a
lot of potential there. However, reports by the FAO and USAID suggest
that women are less able to access these services than men; working with
the Zeitz Foundation and communities in Laikipia, we also hope to
redress the gender imbalance of the audience.  

![image](https://40.media.tumblr.com/9f115763c0782b558521d28e8d4f581d/tumblr_inline_nlgmfl09dU1tn8nre_500.png)

In the future, we will be able to do more than just text smallholders.
Research suggests that the trend in mobile ownership and use is only
likely to accelerate into the future: it is anticipated that 4bn adults
will own a smartphone by 2020, and around 300 million people in the
Middle East and Africa region should have access to a 4G network. Within
a few short years we will be able to send customised maps and rich
visualisations to help smallholders plan and manage their land more
effectively, and level the playing field in terms of access to
information.

Straight from satellites to SMS
-------------------------------

The most exciting part of this project for us is the potential to work
with big earth observation data to provide cheap and timely insights on
a whole range of environmental parameters. Smallholders are rarely able
to access the knowledge we gain from satellites, like land cover change
and weather prediction. With the ESA and NASA both launching more
powerful satellites, able to tell us more about our planet than ever
before, now is the time to pair this capability with the needs of some
of the poorest people in the world. If we can build a system that
presents this data to smallholders in a clear, relevant way, it could
unlock the massive potential of smallholder populations.  

Giving smallholders the tools to secure their own livelihoods
-------------------------------------------------------------

![image](https://40.media.tumblr.com/afbd9213dd71828957b4c6554ca5059f/tumblr_inline_nlgmgdg7NE1tn8nre_500.png)

What we want to do with this project is build a system that gives
smallholders the information they need, in their hands right when they
need it, to build more productive, climate and biodiversity smart
farming systems. With this, smallholders can learn about upcoming
weather events to prepare for (flooding, drought), market opportunities
and new techniques which can improve their productivity. They could then
provide feedback on how successful certain innovations were, or propose
their own proven technique for others to learn from and use.

Powerful information, conveyed clearly, to improve the lives of some of
the poorest people in the world and their environment; this is what we
do. We look forward to updating you on our progress as we discover what
is possible.

Further Reading
---------------

African Smallholder Farmers Group, 2013. [Supporting Smallholder Farmers
in Africa: a Framework for an Enabling
Environment.](http://www.asfg.org.uk/downloads/ASFG-Framework-Report.pdf)

Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, 2011. [The
state of food and agriculture 2010-2011: Women in Agriculture – closing
the gender gap for
development](http://www.fao.org/docrep/013/i2050e/i2050e.pdf).

Graham, M.D. & Ochieng, T., 2008. [Uptake and performance of farm-based
measures for reducing crop raiding by elephants Loxodonta africana among
smallholder farms in Laikipia District,
Kenya](https://www.spaceforgiants.org/sites/default/files/Farm%20based%20deterrents%20for%20mitigating%20human%20elephant%20conflict.pdf).
Oryx, 42(1), pp.76–82.

Manfre, C. & Nordehn, C., 2013. [Exploring the Promise of Information
and Communication Technologies for Women Farmers in
Kenya](https://dl.dropboxusercontent.com/u/15810717/MEAS%20Case%20Studies/MEAS%20CS%20Kenya%20-%20Women%20and%20ICT%20-%20Manfre%20et%20al%20-%20August%202013.pdf).

Otieno, G. et al., 2014. [The feasibility, patterns of use and
acceptability of using mobile phone text-messaging to improve treatment
adherence and post-treatment review of children with uncomplicated
malaria in western
Kenya](http://www.malariajournal.com/content/13/1/44). Malaria journal,
13(1), p.44..

[](http://ag4impact.org/news/no-ordinary-matter-conserving-restoring-and-enhancing-africas-soils-2014/)The
Montpellier Panel, 2014. [No Ordinary Matter: Conserving, Restoring and
Enhancing Africa’s
Soils](http://ag4impact.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/12/MP_0106_Soil_Report_LR1.pdf).\


