---
title: "Launching our work on satellite SMS: Trip Report"
author: Jamie Gibson
date: 2015/04/21
---

![image](/assets/images/posts/g3_a.jpg)

As I sat in seat 19J, watching the sun rising up over the wing of my
plane home from Nairobi, I started reflecting on what has been an
inspirational week for me and Craig. This was mostly to pass the time
because the tv system was broken, but that’s a blog for another time.

One of the first projects Craig told me about when I started at
Vizzuality was around ‘big data for small screens’: could we turn
satellite data into digestible chunks of information, sent by SMS, to
help those on the front line of climate change, environmental
degradation and poverty. This last week we’ve been hosted by the
fantastic Zeitz Foundation in Laikipia County, Kenya, to find out about
the opportunities in this area, and I’m very happy to report on the
strength of those possibilities. We’ve come back with full notebooks,
tonnes of knowledge and plenty of ideas; here are my three key
reflections.

**Reflection \#1: Kenyans are rising to the issues of degradation**

A key part of the week was a big public meeting with a range of
government, business and civil society stakeholders about the project.
The depth of understanding and engagement was superb, and there is a lot
of enthusiasm for projects to conserve and restore the environment.
Almost everywhere we went we saw the different faces of conservation,
from in-situ species protection to low-cost techniques to prevent human
wildlife conflict and rainwater harvesting for agriculture.

Saying that, we also saw a lot of the drivers of environmental damage
manifesting just over the course of our 5 days in Laikipia. The massive
greenhouse and hydroponics complexes being built will put more strain on
depleted rivers, common property is not being managed effectively and
the unpredictable and increasingly variable rains make agriculture more
and more vulnerable. These challenges are being addressed, but there is
more work needed to turn the tide of degradation.

**Reflection \#2: Mobile hasn’t quite killed the Radio Star**

Almost everyone we met had a mobile phone, and the younger people
especially have already hitched onto the smartphone train. This means
that many people in remote areas can access services they were
previously excluded from, like banking, and new systems are being built
all the time to deliver information to the hands of citizens. Some of
the conservancies we talked to also noted their use of text services to
provide information to the community. But it was clear that mobile is by
no means the paramount method for communicating with lots of people very
quickly: radio is still key. So we’re still not quite at the mobile
turn, but it is looking close.

The challenge for me especially, as a social scientist, is to start
playing with the language we use to describe what it is that we do. We
are seeing the seeds of the post-desktop era beginning to germinate, and
so the discourse we build up around what it means to make software needs
to shift. We need to think a lot more about mobile and start reducing
the prominence of desktop in our thinking.

**Reflection \#3: Soil trumps oil**

For many of the people we met, soil is by far the most important
resource they have. And, like oil, in many places our stocks are
dwindling. We were shown areas that resembled desert, only to be told
that maybe 50 years ago it was dense forest. One of the techniques we
hope to promote is [conservation
agriculture](http://www.fao.org/ag/ca/), which is showing some really
promising signs. In one part of the Ol Pejeta conservancy they are able
to grow wheat on very little water because of the way they manage the
soil, retaining cover, organic matter and water. It’s great to see these
innovations starting to bear fruit (and wheat), but we now need to
spread these technologies, tailored to local conditions, to arrest soil
erosion before they become exhausted.

